Let's build our second contract.
So we're gonna do a counter contract.
This time we're gonna mutate state,
we're gonna actually build something
slightly more complicated.
Every single time we call a function.
We're going to increment a number by one.
Second, we're gonna also import this
little thing at the top of our function
every time,
import hardhat slash console.sol.
So this will help us cancel
out from our smart contract.
This is a hard hat piece of functionality,
yet
another reason why hardhat is so
dang fantastic.
So let's create our counter contracts.
Now I do not have the code for
the counter contract up here,
cuz at this point hopefully everyone,
we can follow along for the most part.
If we need it, I can update it
as quickly as possible, but
we're gonna go and we're gonna create
inside of our contracts, Counter.sol.
We'll do exactly as we did before,
we'll put the pragma statement at
the top of it and tell the compiler,
hey, we want to use at least
version 8 of the compiler.
You can actually put a range in here, you
can say hey I can use from ranges four to
8, I just specify the latest one
the latest and the greatest.
And then next we're gonna do an import
of hardhat slash console.sol.
And then of course, we're gonna go
create a contract called counter.
I'll give everyone a moment to kinda
get caught up once I get all this done.
We're gonna create a private member,
or not a private member,
just a member called counter.
So uint counter.
This is obviously a 256 bit number,
very large.
Do we need that size?
Well, there's some benefits to using
that size which we'll go over later,
then we're gonna create
a single function called count.
And it's gonna be public, and
it's gonna return a uint, and
it's gonna go counter ++, everyone's
familiar with the post increment operator.
Then we're gonna console.log out.
Counter is now, counter,
and return the counter.
So there we go, we have just
done a state mutating function.
We have a member on
the contract called counter,
so we have identified some
memory that we want to mutate.
We've referenced it inside of a function,
we've added one to it,
we print it out and we return it.
So based on some previous things I will be
adding these to the repo that I have done.
So here counter.
So if you go to the jpgdegen1,
you'll have it.
But there we go.
We now have our counter done.
And so
we need to make a new deploy script.
The deploy script is gonna do pretty much
the exact same thing that we did before.
But now we're gonna be
deploying the counter.
If it makes it easier,
I can try to add this to the repo,
or to the actual scripts that we're doing.
So let's see, do I have the contract code?
I do have the contract code on here.
I do.
Look at this.
I guess I was smart.
I do have the contract code along with
the deploy script and the sample output.
So look at that.
So if you don't wanna just
mash all the buttons, you can,
everything's already available up there.
Fantastic, right?
Sorry.
I surprised myself,
I impress myself sometimes, I'm kidding.
And I like that.
All right, anyway.
So let's create a new deploy script,
let's call it deploy-counter TypeScript,
we're gonna do the exact same
deployment method we did before.
Now I could go and copy it.
But like I always say it's good to kinda
run through things a few times when
you're brand new.
It makes it really stick inside your head.
So the first thing we got to do,
we got to make sure that our ethers
object has those extra methods on it.
Next, we need to import
ethers from hardhat.
I mean, if you want, you can go and
copy it doesn't really matter to me.
And then next we need to
write our deploy script.
So just like the other time we're
gonna do async function deploy.
We're gonna grab our counter from the file
system that hardhat has already generated.
So const Counter = await
ethers.getContractFactory
Counter the name of our contract.
After we do that let's create our
actual contract on the network,
await counter.deploy.
And of course we wait for
it to be done, await counter.deployed.
Return counter, exact same code again.
You're gonna see this code so
many times today, right?
Is the exact same thing over and
over again.
Read the contract from file,
deploy it to the network, wait for
it to be done being deployed,
return the contract.
So now that we have that let's create a
little fun function called count, why not?
And it will take in
the counter as the contract.
And we're gonna go like this,
we're gonna go await or
let's go console.log
Counter counter.count.
Of course, we gotta await that, or
else we won't get the exact item in there.
And so there we go.
And exactly like before,
we're gonna do deploy, then count.
Fantastic.
We do the deploy, we wait for that promise
to be done, then we do the counter count.
And so theoretically, this should return
us one the first time we execute this,
correct?
We deploy the script,
then we get the counter, we count it once.
We should even be able to go to our node,
see that it counted once because we
put that console dot log in there,
and we should get back the number 1.
So let's go, opp, I gotta make
sure my Python simple servers up.
So let's go here and do an npx
hardhat run just like before, and
we're gonna do scripts, but instead of
deploy-hello, let's do deploy-counter.
There we go.
And of course the network is local host.
Again, so
it will be doing this a bunch and
you'll be kind of doing this a lot if
you do any sort of Ethereum development,
is that you always have to do
this little scripts deploy.
Passing the network you want, or
else it uses the ephemeral network that
it can set up, and tear down right away.
So when we run this, one or
two things is gonna happen.
Either I did this first try, or
we're gonna do it first try next time,
all right?
So fantastic.
A lot of things just happened right here.
So let's go up to the output.
Now notice it says counter,
which is what we put in the JavaScript.
And then it gave you this big transaction.
So what happened with this transaction?
Well, remember how I talked about there's
two types of calls on the Ethereum
networks, those that use gas and
those that do not.
Well, we changed the state of the network
by adding one to a member of a contract.
Therefore this is a transaction,
this is not a call to the network.
Therefore we're not
getting data out of this,
because when is the data considered set?
Well, when a certain number of
transactions have happened after ours and
certain amount of blocks
have been processed.
And some people like to do 32 blocks,
that's considered a set in stone action.
Some people can be fine with 6,
12, whatever.
But nonetheless, what is considered done?
It's kind of always a little bit
of a confusing notion, right?
And so that's why you don't get data
out of a state changing transaction.
Now we can jump over to our node and
we can see that exact same thing.
First, we see that we
deployed our contract.
It is at this location, it used this
address, it was block number 2.
Now if we go up just a little bit more,
you'll notice that our eth
calls to our HelloWorld, never calls a new
block, cuz it's purely reading state.
Whereas now when we go down to our count,
it actually caused
a new block because it had
a transaction that had to be processed.
So got added to the next block.
It also used to this amount of gas.
There you go.
You can see all the basic information who
sent it, who received it, okay?
So something's happened here.
This is different than what it was before.
And lastly, you'll notice that we
see our hardhat counter right here.
This is very, very useful for debugging.
I wanted to put that in there
because it's just super, super,
super nice to have but nothing too
surprising just happened there.